README.md, before:

# Stated Concern

Stated Concern is an ActiveRecord concern for representating states. It's a quick and simple implementation of a state machine.

## Installation

Add the gem to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'stated_concern'
```

And then execute:

```bash
$ bundle
```

See below for instructions on how to use the gem.

**Please note that this gem requires a `state` string column in your database. Please make the appropriate migration as necessary. An example can be found below.**

```ruby
class AddStateToPost < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    add_column :posts, :state, default: 'draft'
  end
end
```

## Usage

First, include the module:

```ruby
include StateMachine
```

Next, define your states:

```ruby
states %w( draft published deleted )
```

Finally, define your transition matrix:

```ruby
def transition_matrix(to_state)
  (draft? && to_state == 'published'  ||
    draft? && to_state == 'deleted'   ||
    published? && to_state == 'draft')
end
```

The transition matrix is a simple method that takes one parameter: a string containing a given state. It should return a boolean that determines if the current object can transition to the given state. This usually involves logic that checks that the current state can transition to the target state.

The finished product should look something like this:

```ruby
class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
  include StateMachine

  states %w( draft published deleted )

  def transition_matrix(to_state)
    (draft? && to_state == 'published'  ||
      draft? && to_state == 'deleted'   ||
      published? && to_state == 'draft')
  end
end
```

### Transitions

Objects can be transitioned by calling the `#transition` method and passing the target state.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                            # => 'draft'
post.transition(to: :published)       # => update_attribute(state: 'published')
post.transition(to: :deleted)         # => RuntimeError
```

This method will raise an exception if no target option is passed or if the transition matrix returns false. *Note*: This method uses `#update_attribute`, so validations are skipped.

Callbacks are triggered on `#transition` as well, so you can hook into the normal cycle with `before_transition`, `after_transition`, etc.

You can also test if an object can be transitioned by calling `#can_transition?`. It returns a boolean and takes the same target option as `#transition`.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                            # => 'draft'
post.can_transition?(to: :published)  # => true

post = Post.find(2)
post.state                            # => 'published'
post.can_transition?(to: :deleted)    # => false
```

This method also raises an exception if the target option is missing, if the transition matrix isn't defined or if the target state isn't defined in the model.

This can be useful in the view layer:

```erb
<% if @post.can_transition?(to: :deleted) %>
  <%= link_to 'Delete', @post, method: :delete %>
<% elsif @post.can_transition?(to: :published) %>
  <%= link_to 'Publish', publish_post_path(@post) %>
<% end %>
```

### Helpers

Stated Concern adds a number of helper methods on the including model that make dealing with states easier.

A general state scope and dynamic individual state scopes are defined to query for records with a specific state.

```ruby
Post.with_state('draft')  # => ActiveRecord::Association
Post.in_draft
Post.in_published
Post.in_deleted
```

Dynamic boolean methods are available to test whether an object is in a specific state.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                # => 'draft'
post.draft?               # => true
post.published?           # => false
post.deleted?             # => false
```

A dynamic constant is also defined that contains an array of the states. This could be useful, for example, in a format validator.

```ruby
Post::STATES              # => ['draft', 'published', 'deleted']
```

## Legal

&copy; 2013 NewAperio, LLC

[Licensed under the MIT license.](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Update AR to 4.1 and update code to use AR's new `enum` feature
- Migrate state machine to use `enum` under the hood
- Add custom error classes
- Update tests
- Misc coding style changes and clean up
- Update README to reflect changes
- Bump to version 0.0.2

README.md, after:

# Stated Concern

Stated Concern is an ActiveRecord concern for representating states. It's a quick and simple implementation of a state machine based on ActiveRecord's [`enum`](http://api.rubyonrails.org/v4.1.0/classes/ActiveRecord/Enum.html).

## Installation

Add the gem to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'stated_concern'
```

And then execute:

```bash
$ bundle
```

See below for instructions on how to use the gem.

**Please note that this gem requires a `state` integer column in your database. Please make the appropriate migration as necessary. An example can be found below.**

```ruby
class AddStateToPost < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    add_column :posts, :state, :integer, default: 0
  end
end
```

## Usage

First, include the module:

```ruby
include StateMachine
```

Next, define your states:

```ruby
states %w( draft published deleted )
```

Finally, define your transition matrix:

```ruby
def transition_matrix(to_state)
  (draft? && to_state == 'published'  ||
    draft? && to_state == 'deleted'   ||
    published? && to_state == 'draft')
end
```

The transition matrix is a simple method that takes one parameter: a string containing a given state. It should return a boolean that determines if the current object can transition to the given state. This usually involves logic that checks that the current state can transition to the target state.

The finished product should look something like this:

```ruby
class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
  include StateMachine

  states %w( draft published deleted )

  def transition_matrix(to_state)
    (draft? && to_state == 'published'  ||
      draft? && to_state == 'deleted'   ||
      published? && to_state == 'draft')
  end
end
```

### Transitions

Objects can be transitioned by calling the `#transition` method and passing the target state.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                            # => 'draft'
post.transition(to: :published)       # => update_attribute(state: 'published')
post.transition(to: :deleted)         # => ImproperStateTransitionError
```

This method will raise an exception if no target option is passed or if the transition matrix returns false. *Note*: This method uses `#update_attribute`, so validations are skipped.

Callbacks are triggered on `#transition` as well, so you can hook into the normal cycle with `before_transition`, `after_transition`, etc.

You can also test if an object can be transitioned by calling `#can_transition?`. It returns a boolean and takes the same target option as `#transition`.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                            # => 'draft'
post.can_transition?(to: :published)  # => true

post = Post.find(2)
post.state                            # => 'published'
post.can_transition?(to: :deleted)    # => false
```

This method also raises an exception if the target option is missing, if the transition matrix isn't defined or if the target state isn't defined in the model.

This can be useful in the view layer:

```erb
<% if @post.can_transition?(to: :deleted) %>
  <%= link_to 'Delete', @post, method: :delete %>
<% elsif @post.can_transition?(to: :published) %>
  <%= link_to 'Publish', publish_post_path(@post) %>
<% end %>
```

### Helpers

Stated Concern adds a number of helper methods on the including model that make dealing with states easier.

A general state scope and dynamic individual state scopes are defined to query for records with a specific state.

```ruby
Post.with_state('draft')  # => ActiveRecord::Association
Post.draft
Post.published
Post.deleted
```

Dynamic boolean methods are available to test whether an object is in a specific state.

```ruby
post = Post.find(1)
post.state                # => 'draft'
post.draft?               # => true
post.published?           # => false
post.deleted?             # => false
```

A dynamic class method is also defined that contains an array of the states. This could be useful, for example, in a format validator.

```ruby
Post.states               # => {'draft' => 0, 'published' => 1, 'deleted' => 2}
```

## Legal

&copy; 2013 NewAperio, LLC

[Licensed under the MIT license.](LICENSE)
